1 
 
A guide to systematic review and meta-analysis  
of prognostic factor studies 
 
Richard D Riley1#*, Karel GM Moons2,4#, Kym IE Snell1, Joie Ensor1,  
Lotty Hooft2,4, Douglas G Altman3, Jill Hayden4,  Gary S Collins3, Thomas 
PA Debray2,5  
 
 
Contact details: 
* corresponding author: Professor of Biostatistics; e-mail: r.riley@keele.ac.uk;   
 Tel:  +44 (0) 1782 733905   Fax: +44 (0) 1782 734719 
# both authors contributed equally  
1 Centre for Prognosis Research, Research Institute for Primary Care and Health Sciences, Keele 
University, Staffordshire, UK. ST5 5BG 
2 Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht  
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands 
3 Centre for Statistics in Medicine, Nuffield Department of Orthopaedics, Rheumatology and 
Musculoskeletal Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. OX3 7LD. 
4 Centre for Clinical Research, 5790 University Ave, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada. B3H 1V7 
5 Cochrane Netherlands, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht  
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands 
 
 
WORD COUNT: 6000 
 
  

2 
 
Summary Points  
 Primary studies to identify prognostic factors are abundant, but often have conflicting 
findings and variable quality. This motivates systematic reviews and meta-analyses to 
identify, evaluate and summarise prognostic factor studies and their findings.  
 A clear review question should be framed using a PICOTS system, and a transparent 
search undertaken for eligible articles. Broad search strings may be required, leading to a 
large number of articles to screen. 
 A data extraction phase is needed to obtain the relevant information from each study. A 
modification of the CHARMS checklist can be used (CHARMS-PF). 
 The QUIPS tool can be used to examine each study’s risk of bias. Unfortunately many 
primary studies will have a high risk of bias due to poor standards of design, conduct, 
analysis and reporting. Applicability of a study should also be checked. 
 If appropriate, meta-analysis can be used to combine prognostic effect estimates (such as 
hazard ratios or odds ratios) across studies, to produce an overall summary of a factor’s 
prognostic effect. Between-study heterogeneity should be expected and accounted for. 
 Ideally separate meta-analyses should be performed for unadjusted and adjusted results; 
the latter is more important, to examine a factor’s independent prognostic value over and 
above (i.e. after adjustment for) existing prognostic factors. 
 Separate meta-analyses may also be required for each method of measurement (for 
factors and outcomes), each approach to handling continuous factors, and each type of 
estimate (e.g. hazard ratios, odds ratios). 
 Publication bias is a major threat to the validity of meta-analyses based on published 
evidence, and may cause small-study effects (asymmetry on a funnel plot).  
 REMARK and PRISMA can be used to guide the reporting of the systematic review and 
meta-analysis, and the degree of confidence in the summary results from the review may 
be examined using adapted forms of GRADE for interventions and diagnostic test accuracy 
studies. 
 Availability of individual participant data (IPD) may alleviate some of the challenges. 
 
Standfirst  
Prognostic factors are associated with the risk of future health outcomes in individuals with a 
particular health condition or clinical start-point. Research to identify genuine prognostic factors is 
important, as they may help improve risk stratification, treatment decisions, and the design of 
randomised trials. However, thousands of prognostic factor studies are published each year, often 
with variable quality and inconsistent findings. This motivates the need for systematic reviews and 
meta-analyses that summarise the evidence about the prognostic value of particular factors. Here, 
we describe the key steps involved in this review process.  

3 
 
Introduction  
Systematic reviews and meta-analyses are common in the medical literature, routinely appearing in 
specialist and general medical journals, and forming the cornerstone of Cochrane. The majority of 
systematic reviews focus on summarising the benefit of one or more therapeutic interventions for a 
particular condition. However, they are also important for summarising other evidence, such as 
summarising the accuracy of screening and diagnostic tests,1 the aetiological association of risk 
factors for disease onset, and the prognostic ability of bespoke factors and (bio)markers. The latter 
arise from prognosis studies, which aim to examine and predict future outcomes (such as death, 
disease progression, or medical complications such as pre-eclampsia) in those with(in) a particular 
health condition or start-point (such as receiving a certain diagnosis, undergoing surgery, or being 
pregnant). 
The PROGRESS (PROGnosis RESearch Strategy) framework defines four types of prognosis research 
objectives: (i) to summarise overall prognosis (e.g. overall risk or rate) of health outcomes for groups 
defined by a particular health condition,2 (ii) to identify prognostic factors associated with changes in 
health outcomes,3 (iii) to develop, validate and examine the impact of prognostic models for 
individualised prediction of such outcomes,4 and (iv) to identify predictors of an individual’s 
response to treatment.5 Each topic area requires specific methods and tools for conducting a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Two recent articles provided a guide to undertaking reviews 
and meta-analysis of prognostic (prediction) models.6 7 Here, we focus on prognostic factors, which is 
the most common type of prognosis research.  
A prognostic factor is any variable that, among people with a given health condition, is associated 
with the risk of a subsequent health outcome. Different values or categories of a prognostic factor 
are associated with a better or worse prognosis, i.e. of future health outcomes. For example, in 
many cancers tumour grade at the time of histological diagnosis is a prognostic factor because it is 
associated with time to subsequent disease recurrence or death. Each grade represents a group of 
patients with a different average prognosis, and the risk or rate (hazard) of the outcome increases 
with higher grades. Many routinely collected patient characteristics are prognostic, such as sex, age, 
body mass index, smoking status, blood pressure, co-morbidities and symptoms. Many researched 
prognostic factors are biomarkers, which include a diverse range of blood, urine, imaging, 
electrophysiological, and physiological variables.  
Prognostic factors have many potential uses, including aiding treatment decisions, improving 
individual risk prediction, providing novel targets for new treatment, and enhancing the design and 

4 
 
analysis of randomised trials.3 This motivates so-called ‘prognostic factor research’ to identify 
genuine prognostic factors (sometimes also called ‘predictor finding studies’8).9 Thousands of such 
studies are published each year, but they often have variable quality and inconsistent findings. This 
motivates the need for systematic reviews and meta-analyses that summarise the evidence about 
the prognostic value of particular factors.10-12 In this article, we provide a step-by-step guide to 
conducting such reviews. Our aim is to help researchers understand the key principles, methods, and 
challenges of conducting reviews of prognostic factor studies, to produce robust evidence-based 
summaries about prognostic factors.   
 
Step 1: Defining the research question  
The first step is to define the review question. Reviews of prognostic factor studies fall within the 
remit of type 2 of the PROGRESS framework,2 as they aim to summarise the prognostic value of a 
particular factor (or each of multiple factors) within a particular disease field for relevant health 
outcomes and time-points. Some reviews may be broad. For example, Riley et al. aim to identify any 
prognostic factor for overall and disease-free survival in children with neuroblastoma or Ewing’s 
sarcoma.13 Other reviews may have a narrower focus. For example, Hemingway et al. aim to 
summarise the evidence for whether C-reactive protein (CRP) is a prognostic factor for fatal and 
nonfatal events among patients with stable coronary disease.14 This CRP review will be used as a 
running illustrative example throughout this article. 
CHARMS (CHecklist for critical Appraisal and data extraction for systematic Reviews of 
prediction Modelling Studies) provides guidance for formulating a review question and a checklist 
for extracting data and critically appraising  included studies.15 Though developed,15 and further 
refined,6 for reviews of prediction model studies, it can also be used to define and frame the 
question for reviews of prognostic factor studies. CHARMS15 and subsequent improvements6  
propose a modification (called PICOTS) of the traditional PICO system (Population, Index 
intervention, Comparison, and Outcome) used in systematic reviews of therapeutic intervention 
studies, by additionally considering Timing and Setting (see Figure 1) . In the context of prognostic 
factor reviews, the P of Population and O of Outcome remain largely the same, but now the I refers 
to Index prognostic factor(s) and the C refers to other prognostic factors that can be considered as 
Comparators in some way(s). For example, the aim may be to compare the prognostic ability of a 
certain index factor to one or more other (i.e. comparator) prognostic factors; or to investigate the 
adjusted prognostic value of a particular index factor, i.e. over and above (adjusted for) other (i.e. 

5 
 
comparator) prognostic factors. If the only aim is to summarise the unadjusted prognostic effect of a 
particular index factor, which we do not generally recommend, then there is actually no comparator 
factor being addressed. The T denotes Timing and actually refers to two concepts of time:  (i) at 
what time-point the prognostic factors under review are to be used (i.e. the time point of at which 
prognosis information is required) and (ii) over what time period the outcome(s) are predicted by 
these factors.  The S of Setting refers to the setting or context in which the index prognostic factor(s) 
are to be used as the prognostic ability of a factor may change across healthcare settings." 
An important component of reviews addressing prognostic factors is whether unadjusted or 
adjusted estimates of the index prognostic factor(s) will be summarised, or both. We recommend 
that reviewers primarily focus on adjusted prognostic effects, as these reveal whether a certain 
index factor contributes independently to the prediction of the outcome, irrespective of (i.e. 
adjusted for) other prognostic factors. In particular, usually for each clinical scenario there are so-
called ‘established’ or ‘conventional’ prognostic factors that are always measured. Therefore, for 
prognostic factors under review, it is important to understand whether they contribute additional 
(sometimes called ‘independent’) prognostic information to these routinely measured ones. This 
means that adjusted (and not unadjusted or crude) prognostic effect estimates need to be estimated 
and reported in primary prognostic factor studies. Such independent effects are typically derived 
from a multivariable regression model containing both the established prognostic factors plus each 
index prognostic factor of interest. For example, consider a logistic regression of a binary outcome 
including three adjustment factors (A1, A2 and A3, say) and one new index prognostic factor  (X1, say), 
which is expressed as:  
𝑙𝑛(𝑝/(1−𝑝)) = 𝛼+𝛽1𝐴1+𝛽2𝐴2 +𝛽3𝐴3 +𝛽4𝑋1 
Here, 𝑝 is the probability of the outcome, and after estimation of all the unknown parameters (i.e. 
𝛼,𝛽1,𝛽2,𝛽3,𝛽4), of key interest is the estimated 𝛽4, as this provides the adjusted prognostic effect of 
the index prognostic factor, revealing its independent contribution to the prediction of the outcome 
irrespective of the prognostic  effects of the other (established) factors A1, A2 and A3 combined.    
The need to focus on adjusted prognostic effects is no different from systematic reviews of 
aetiological studies, where the focus is on estimating the association of a certain causal risk factor 
after adjustment for other risk factors. In such causal research these factors are usually referred to 
as ‘confounders’ rather than as ‘other prognostic factors’ which is typically used for prognosis 
research. The crude (unadjusted) prognostic effect of some index factor may completely disappear 
after adjustment and is therefore rather uninformative, especially since prognostication in 

6 
 
healthcare is rarely based on a single prognostic factor bur rather on the information of multiple 
prognostic factors.4   
In this article our focus is on systematic reviews to summarise prognostic effect estimates. Some 
primary studies may also evaluate an index factor’s added value in terms of improvement in risk 
classification and clinical utility (e.g. using measures such as net reclassification improvement and 
net-benefit), and change in prediction model performance (e.g. by calculating the change in the 
concordance index, also known as the C-statistic or area under the ROC curve).16-19 However, this is 
beyond the scope of this article, and we refer the reader to other relevant sources.6 20 21 
 
Application to the CRP review:  
CRP is widely studied for its prognostic value in patients with coronary disease, but there is 
continued uncertainty as to whether it is useful as US and European clinical practice guidelines 
recommend measurement but clinical practice varies widely. This motivated the systematic review 
by Hemingway et al.,14 for which the corresponding PICOTS system is shown in Figure 1. No studies 
were excluded on the basis of methodological standards, sample size, duration of follow-up, 
publication year, or language of publication. 
 
Step 2: Searching and selection of eligible studies   
The next step is to identify primary studies that are eligible for the review; studies that address the 
review question defined in step 1 following the PICOTS framework.  Unfortunately, it is more difficult 
to identify prognostic factor studies than randomised trials of interventions. Prognosis studies do not 
tend to be indexed (‘tagged’) because a taxonomy of prognosis research is not widely recognised. 
Moreover, compared to studies of interventions, in prognostic factor studies there is much more 
variation in designs (e.g. cohort study data, randomised trial data, routine care registry data and 
case control study data can all be used), patient inclusion criteria, predictor and outcome 
measurement, follow up time, methods of statistical analysis, and in the adjustment of (and number 
of) other prognostic factors (covariates). Between-study heterogeneity is thus the rule rather than 
the exception in prognostic factor research. It is therefore essential systematic reviews of prognostic 
factor studies define the study inclusion and exclusion criteria based on the PICOTS structure (step 
1), as it determines the study search and selection strategy. 

7 
 
Typically broad search and selection filters are required, combining terms related to prognosis 
research (such as prognostic, predict, predictor, factor, independent) with domain or disease specific 
terms (such as the name of prognostic factors and the targeted disease or patient population).22 
Such a broad search comes at the (often considerable) expense of retrieving many irrelevant 
records. Geersing et al.23 validated various existing search strategies for prognosis studies and also 
suggested a generic filter for identifying studies of prognostic factors,22 24 25 which extended the work 
of Ingui, Haynes and Wong.22 24 25  When tested in a single review of prognostic factors, this generic 
filter had a number needed to read (NNR) of 569, emphasising the difficulty in targeting prognostic 
factor articles. The NNR might be considerably reduced in situations where specific factors and/or 
populations are added to the filter. Even then, care is still needed to be inclusive, as multiple terms 
are often used for the same meaning; for example, biomarker MYCN is also referred to as n-myc and 
nmyc amongst others.13 
Once the search is complete, each potentially relevant study must be screened for their applicability 
to the review question. Due to the aforementioned heterogeneity in prognostic factor studies, 
during this study selection phase more deviations from the defined PICOTS (in step 1) are possible 
(indeed, far greater than what is typically encountered during the selection of randomised 
intervention studies). The applicability of this primary study selection should first be based on title 
and abstracts screening, followed by full text screening (see below) both ideally done by two 
researchers independently. Any discrepancies should be resolved through discussion, and potentially 
with a third reviewer. To check if any relevant articles have been missed, it is helpful to share the list 
of identified studies with researchers in the field, to examine the reference lists of identified articles, 
and to perform a citation search.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

8 
 
Figure 1 : Six items, abbreviated as PICOTS, to help define the question for systematic reviews of 
prognostic factor studies as based on the CHARMS guidance15 and applied to a review of the 
adjusted prognostic value of CRP.14  
 
 Population: define the target population in which the prognostic factor(s) under review are to 
be used.  
           e.g. CRP review: patients with stable coronary disease, defined as clinically diagnosed 
angina pectoris or angiographic disease, or a history of previous acute coronary syndrome 
at least 2 weeks prior to prognostic factor (CRP) measurement. 
 
 Index prognostic factor: define the factor(s) whose prognostic value is under review.  
           e.g. CRP review: CRP was the single biomarker reviewed for its prognostic value. 
 
 Comparator prognostic factor(s): comparator prognostic factors can be considered in a 
review in various ways. For example, the aim might be to compare the prognostic ability of 
a certain index factor to two or more other (i.e. comparator) prognostic factors. Also, the 
aim may  be to review the adjusted prognostic value of a particular index factors, i.e. over 
and above (adjusted for, independent of) other existing (i.e. comparator) prognostic 
factors. If the only aim is to summarise the unadjusted prognostic effect of a particular 
index factor, then there is actually no comparator factor being addressed. 
           e.g. CRP review: the focus was on the adjusted prognostic value of CRP; i.e. its prognostic 
effect after adjusting for existing (comparator) prognostic factors. In particular, 
adjustment for the following conventional prognostic factors was of interest: age, sex, 
smoking status, obesity, diabetes, and one or more lipid variables [from total cholesterol, 
LDL cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, trigylcerides], and inflammatory markers [fibrinogen, IL-
6, white cell count]). 
 
 Outcome: define the outcome(s) for which the prognostic ability of the factor(s) under review 
are of interest.  
           e.g. CRP review: outcome events were defined as coronary (coronary death, sudden 
cardiac death, acute nonfatal myocardial infarction, primary percutaneous coronary 
intervention, unplanned emergency admissions with unstable angina), cardiovascular 
(where coronary events were reported in combination with heart failure, stroke, or 
peripheral arterial disease), and all-cause mortality.  
 
 Timing: define (i) at what time-point(s) the prognostic factors (index and comparators) are to 
be used (i.e. the time point of prognostication) and (ii) over what time period the 
outcome(s) are predicted by these factors.  
e.g. CRP review: there was no restriction on the time-points and time period. The CRP 
measurement had to be done at least two weeks after diagnosis and all follow-up 
information on the outcomes (all time periods) was extracted from the studies. 
 
 Setting: define the intended role or setting of the prognostic factor(s) under review. 
           e.g. CRP review: CRP measurement was studied in both primary and secondary care to 
provide prognostic information about patients diagnosed with coronary heart disease, 
and thus may be useful for healthcare professionals treating and managing such patients. 
 

9 
 
Application to the CRP review:  
Hemingway et al. included any prospective observational study that reported risk of subsequent 
events among patients with stable coronary disease in relation to measured CRP values.14 Eligible 
studies had to include patients with stable coronary disease, defined as clinically diagnosed angina 
pectoris or angiographic disease, or a history of previous acute coronary syndrome at least 2 weeks 
prior to CRP measurement. They searched MEDLINE between 1966 and 25 November 2009 and 
EMBASE between 1980 and 17 December 2009, using a search string containing terms for coronary 
disease, prognostic studies, and CRP. The search identified 1,566 articles of which 83 studies fulfilled 
the inclusion criteria. Had specific terms for CRP not been included in the search string, then the 
total number of identified articles would have far exceeded 1,566. 
Step 3: Data extraction  
The next step is to extract key information from each selected study. Data extraction provides the 
necessary data from each study, which enables reviewers to examine their (eventual) applicability 
and risk of bias (see step 4). It also provides the information required for subsequent qualitative and 
quantitative (meta-analysis) synthesis of the evidence across studies. The CHARMS checklist provides 
explicit guidance (see Table 2 in Moons et al15) about which key items across 11 domains should be 
extracted from primary studies of prediction models, and for what reason (i.e. to provide general 
information of the primary study, to guide risk of bias assessment or to judge applicability of the 
primary study for the review question at hand). In Figure 2, based on considerable experience of 
conducting systematic reviews of prognostic factor studies, we modified the original CHARMS 
checklist for prediction model studies, to make it suitable for data extraction purposes in reviews of 
prognostic factors; we refer to it as CHARMS-PF. This basically means that three domains typically 
addressing prediction modelling were combined to one overall Analysis domain, while other domain 
names and key items were slightly reworded or extended. Reasons for extraction of each key item 
were similar to the CHARMS checklist for prediction models. As we developed the original CHARMS 
checklist, a wider consensus agreement of the CHARMS-PF content was not considered necessary. 
Reviewers should extract fundamental information from the studies, such as the dates, setting, 
study design, definitions of start-points, outcomes, follow-up length, and prognostic factors; 
reviewers will often find large heterogeneity across studies in these aspects.  The extracted 
information allows for summary tables of study characteristics. In addition, more specific 
information is needed for proper risk of bias and additional applicability assessment (see step 4), 
such as methods of measurement of the prognostic factors and outcomes, the handling of missing 

10 
 
data, attrition (lost to follow-up), and whether estimated associations of the prognostic factors 
under review were adjusted for other prognostic factors. This also enhances the potential for meta-
analysis and the presentation and interpretation of subsequent summary results (see steps 5-8).   
To enable meta-analysis of prognostic factor studies, the key elements to extract are estimates, and 
corresponding standard errors or confidence intervals, of the prognostic effect for each factor of 
interest; for example, the estimated risk ratio or odds ratio (for binary outcomes), the hazard ratio 
(for time-to-event outcomes), or mean difference (for continuous outcomes). As most prognostic 
factor studies consider time-to-event outcomes (including censored observations and different 
follow-up lengths for patients), hazard ratios are often the most suitable effect measure. A concern 
is that hazard ratios may not be constant over time, and therefore any evaluations of non-
proportional hazards (i.e. non-constant hazard ratios for the prognostic factors of interest) should 
also be extracted. Such information may unfortunately be rarely reported. 
Unfortunately, many prognostic factor studies do not adequately report estimated effect measures 
and/or their precision. For this reason, methods are available to restore the missing information 
upon data extraction. In particular, Parmar et al.26 and Tierney et al.27 describe how to obtain 
unadjusted hazard ratio estimates (and their variances) when they are not reported directly. For 
example, under assumptions, the number of outcomes (events) and an available p-value (e.g. from a 
log-rank test or Cox regression) can be used to indirectly estimate the unadjusted hazard ratio 
between two groups defined by a particular factor (e.g. ‘’positive’ versus ’negative’ levels). Perneger 
et al.28 suggest how to derive unadjusted hazard ratios from survival proportions, and Perez suggest 
to use a simulation approach.29 Even with such indirect estimation methods, not all results will be 
obtainable. For example, in a systematic review of 575 studies investigating prognostic factors in 
neuroblastoma,30 the methods of Parmar et al. were used to obtain 204 hazard ratios estimates and 
their confidence intervals; but this represented only 35.5% of the potential evidence.  
  

11 
 
Figure 2: The CHARMS-PF checklist of key items to be extracted from primary studies of prognostic 
factors, based on additions and modifications of the original CHARMS checklist for primary studies of 
prediction models15, to serve general description, assessment of applicability or risk of bias. 
Domain Key items General Applic
ability 
Risk of 
Bias 
SOURCE OF DATA Source of data (e.g. cohort, case-control, randomised trial participants, or registry data)  X X 
PARTICIPANTS 
Participant eligibility and recruitment method (e.g. consecutive participants, location, 
number of centres, setting, inclusion and exclusion criteria) 
X X X 
Participants description X X  
Details of treatments received, if relevant  X X 
Study dates X X  
OUTCOME(S) TO BE 
PREDICTED 
Definition and method for measurement of outcome(s)  X X 
Was the same outcome definition (and method for measurement) used in all 
participants? 
  X 
Type of outcome(s) (e.g. single or combined endpoints) X X  
Was the outcome(s) assessed without knowledge of the candidate prognostic factors (i.e. 
blinded)? 
  X 
Were candidate prognostic factors part of the outcome (e.g. when using a panel or 
consensus outcome measurement)? 
  X 
Time of outcome(s) occurrence or summary of duration of follow-up X X X 
PROGNOSTIC 
FACTORS (including 
index and 
comparator 
prognostic factors) 
Number and type of prognostic factors (e.g. obtained from demographics, patient history, 
physical examination, additional testing, disease characteristics) 
X   
Definition and method for measurement of prognostic factors  X X 
Timing of prognostic factor measurement (e.g. at patient presentation, at diagnosis, at 
treatment initiation, end of surgery) 
 X X 
Were prognostic factors assessed blinded for outcome, and for each other (if relevant)?   X 
Handling of prognostic factors in the modelling (e.g. continuous, linear, non-linear 
transformations or categorised) 
  X 
SAMPLE SIZE 
Was a sample size calculation conducted and, if so, how? X   
Number of participants and number of outcomes/events X   
Number of outcomes/events in relation to the number of candidate prognostic factors 
(Events Per Variable) 
  X 
MISSING DATA 
Number of participants with any missing value (in the prognostic factors and outcomes) X  X 
Number of participants with missing data for each prognostic factor of interest   X 
Details of attrition (loss to follow-up) and, for time-to-event outcomes, number of 
censored observations (ideally in each category for those categorical prognostic factors of 
interest) 
  X 
Handling of missing data (e.g. complete-case analysis, imputation, or other methods)   X 
ANALYSIS  
Modelling method (e.g. linear, logistic, Cox, parametric survival, competing risks 
regression)  
X  X 
How modelling assumptions were checked. In particular, for time-to-event outcomes and 
the analysis of hazard ratios, the method for assessing non-proportional hazards (non-
constant hazard ratios over time). 
  X 
Method for selection of prognostic factors for inclusion in multivariable modelling (e.g. all 
candidate prognostic factors considered, pre-selection of established prognostic factors, 
retain only those significant from univariable analysis) 
  X 
Method for selection/exclusion of prognostic factors (including those of interest and 
those used as adjustment factors) during multivariable modelling (e.g. backward or 
forward selection, or full model approach including all factors regardless) and criteria 
used for any selection/exclusion (e.g. p-value, Akaike Information Criterion) 
  X 
Method of handling each continuous prognostic factor (e.g. dichotomisation, 
categorisation, linear, non-linear), including values of any cut-points used and their 
justification. For non-linear trends, the method of identifying non-linear relationships 
(e.g. splines, fractional polynomials). 
  X 

12 
 
RESULTS 
Unadjusted and adjusted prognostic effect estimates (e.g. risk ratios, odds ratios, hazard 
ratios, mean differences) for each prognostic factor of interest, and the corresponding 
95% confidence interval (or variance or standard error). Details of any non-linear 
relationships and whether modelling assumptions hold. In particular, for time-to-event 
outcomes, any evidence of non-proportional hazards (non-constant hazard ratios) for 
each prognostic factor of interest. 
X X  
For each extracted adjusted prognostic effect estimate of interest, the set of adjustment 
factors used.  
X X  
INTERPRETATION 
AND DISCUSSION  
Interpretation of presented results X X  
Comparison with other studies, discussion of generalizability, strengths and limitations. X X  
 
Although indirect estimation methods help retrieve unadjusted prognostic effect estimates, they 
often have limited value for obtaining adjusted effect estimates. Furthermore, even when multiple 
studies do provide the adjusted prognostic effect of a particular factor, then the set of adjustment 
factors will usually differ across studies. This complicates the interpretation of subsequent meta-
analysis results. We recommend that reviewers, therefore, pre-define the core set of  prognostic 
factors  for the outcome  of interest (e.g. age, gender, smoking, disease stage, etc.), that represents 
the desired ‘minimal’ set of adjustment factors . A consensus process, amongst health professionals 
and researchers in the field, may be required to agree this set. For example, a list of established 
prognostic factors could be identified that are routinely used within current prognostication of the 
clinical population of interest. 
It may also be necessary to standardise the extracted estimates, to ensure they all relate to the same 
scale and direction in each study. In particular, the direction of effect will need standardising if one 
study compares the hazard rate in a factor’s ‘high’ versus ‘normal’ group, whereas another study 
compares the hazard rate in the factor’s ‘normal’ group versus ‘high’ group. When the outcome is 
defined differently across studies, approaches to convert effect measures on different outcome 
scales might also be useful.31 To deal with different cut-point levels for a particular continuous factor 
factor’s values,32 which allows them to convert prognostic effects of ‘high’ versus ‘normal’ to 
prognostic effects relating to a 1-unit increase in the factor. A similar approach was used by 
Hemingway et al.14 A concern, however, is that the actual distribution of a prognostic factor may be 
unknown (or even vary across studies). Finally, it is also possible to derive standardized effect 
estimates by standardizing the corresponding regression coefficients.33 
Application to the CRP review:  
Hemingway et al extracted background information such as year of study start, number of included 
patients, mean age, baseline coronary morbidity (e.g. proportion with stable angina), average levels 
of biomarker at baseline, method of CRP measurement, follow-up duration, and number and type of 

13 
 
events. Basic information was often missing. For example, nearly a fifth of studies did not report the 
method of measurement, and only a quarter gave the number of patients included in the analyses 
and reasons for dropout. Prognostic effect estimates for CRP were extracted in terms of either the 
reported risk ratio, odds ratio or hazard ratio (labelled as ‘relative risk’), and their 95% confidence 
intervals. These effect estimates were then converted to a standardised scale comparing the highest 
third with the lowest third of the (log-transformed) CRP distribution. Where available, separate 
prognostic effect estimates were extracted for different degrees of adjustment for other prognostic 
factors.  
Step 4: Evaluating applicability and risk of bias  of primary 
studies  
Once eligible studies have been identified and data has been extracted, an important next step is to 
assess the applicability and risk of bias (quality) of each study for the review. As for steps 2 and 3, 
ideally this is done by two reviewers, independently, with any discrepancies resolved.  As 
mentioned, applicability refers to the extent to which a selected study (in step 2) matches the review 
question in terms of the population, timing, prognostic factors and outcomes (endpoints) of interest. 
Just because a study is eligible for inclusion does not mean it is free from applicability concerns. A 
study may be applicable in some aspects (e.g. correct condition at start-point, with prognostic 
factors of interest evaluated) but not others (e.g. incorrect population or setting, inappropriate 
outcome definition, too different follow-up time, lack of adjustment for conventional prognostic 
factors).  Applicability is typically done at the title and abstract screening as well as in this step based 
on full text screening, obviously determined by the PICOTS (step 1) and in/exclusion criteria of 
studies (step 2).   
Risk of bias refers to the extent to which flaws in the study design or analysis methods may lead to 
bias in estimates of the prognostic factor effects.  Unfortunately, based on growing empirical 
evidence from systematic reviews examining methodology quality, many primary studies will be at 
high risk of bias.30 34-36 8 37-40 41 42 For prognostic factor studies, Hayden et al. developed the QUIPS 
checklist for examining risk of bias across six domains:43 Study Participation, Study Attrition, 
Prognostic Factor Measurement, Outcome Measurement, Adjustment for other prognostic factors, 
and Statistical Analysis and Reporting. Figure 3 shows the signalling items within these domains, to 
help guide reviewers toward low, unclear or high risk of bias classifications. Additional guidance may 
be found from general tools examining the quality of observational studies,44 45 and the REMARK 
guideline for reporting of primary prognostic factor studies.46 47 

14 
 
We recommend that users first operationalise criteria to assess the signalling items and domains for 
the specific review question. For example, with the study participation and attrition domains, this 
includes defining a priori the most important characteristics that may indicate a systematic bias in 
study recruitment (study participation domain) and loss to follow-up (study attrition domain). 
Defining these characteristics ahead of time will facilitate assessment and consensus related to the 
importance of potential differences that could influence the observed association between the index 
prognostic factors and outcomes of interest. Definitions of sufficiently valid and reliable 
measurement of the index prognostic factor(s) and outcome(s) should also be specified at the 
protocol stage. Similarly the core set of adjustment prognostic factors, that are deemed necessary 
for the primary studies to have used, should be pre-defined to facilitate judgement related to risk of 
bias of domain 5.  
Overall assessment of the six risk of bias domains is undertaken by considering the risk of bias 
information from the signalling items for each domain, rated as low, moderate and high risk of bias. 
Occasionally, item information to assess the bias domains is not available in the study report. It is 
then recommend consulting other publications that may have used the same dataset (as often in 
prognostic studies based on large existing cohorts), and contacting study authors for additional 
information. An informed judgement about the potential risk of bias for each bias domain should be 
made independently by two reviewers, and discussed to reach consensus. Each of the six domains 
needs to be rated and reported each of these to inform readers, inform the field for future primary 
studies, and to facilitate future meta-epidemiological research. To make a judgment about the 
overall study risk of bias, we recommend to describe studies with a ‘low risk of bias’ as those studies 
where all, or the most important domains (as determined a priori), are rated as having low (or 
low/moderate) risk of bias.  
Application to the CRP review:  
Hemingway et al. infer the quality of included studies by the quality of their reporting on 17 items 
derived from the REMARK guidelines.47 The median number of study quality items reported was 7 
out of a possible 17, and standards did not change between 1997 and 2009. Only two studies 
referred to a study protocol, with none referring to a statistical analysis plan. Hemingway et al. note 
that this “makes it difficult to know what the specific research objectives were at the start of cohort 
recruitment, at the time of CRP measurement, or at the onset of the statistical analysis.”14 Only two 
studies reported the time elapsed between first lifetime presentation with coronary disease and 
assessment of CRP, raising applicability concerns.  

15 
 
Figure 3: The QUIPS tool to assess Quality in Prognostic factor Studies, which can be used to classify 
risk of bias of prognostic factor studies. We modified some wording of Hayden et al.,43 to be 
consistent with terminology used in our article. 
Domains  Signalling items  Ratings 
1. Study 
Participation  
a. Adequate participation in the 
study by eligible persons  
b. Description of the target  
population or population of interest  
c. Description of the baseline study 
sample  
d. Adequate description of the 
sampling frame and recruitment  
e. Adequate description of the period 
and place of recruitment  
f. Adequate description of inclusion 
and exclusion criteria  
High bias: The relationship between the 
PF and outcome is very likely to be 
different for participants and eligible 
nonparticipants  
  
Moderate: The relationship between 
the PF and outcome may be different 
for participants and eligible 
nonparticipants  
  
Low bias: The relationship between the 
PF and outcome is unlikely to be 
different for participants and eligible 
nonparticipants  
2. Study 
Attrition  
a. Adequate response rate for study 
participants   
b. Description of attempts to collect 
information on participants who 
dropped out  
c. Reasons for loss to follow-up are  
provided  
d. Adequate description of 
participants lost to follow-up  
e. There are no important differences 
between participants who completed 
the study and those who did not  
High bias: The relationship between the 
PF and outcome is very likely to be 
different for  completing and non-
completing participants  
  
Moderate: The relationship between 
the PF and outcome may be different 
for completing and non-completing 
participants  
  
Low bias: The relationship between the 
PF and outcome is unlikely to be 
different for completing and non-
completing participants  
3. Prognostic 
Factor 
Measurement  
a. A clear definition or description of 
the PF is provided  
b. Method of PF measurement is 
adequately valid and reliable  
c. Continuous variables are reported 
or appropriate cut points are used  
d. The method and setting of 
measurement of PF is the same for 
all study participants  
e. Adequate proportion of the study 
sample has complete data for the PF  
f. Appropriate methods of 
imputation are used for missing PF 
data 
High bias: The measurement of the PF is 
very likely to be different for different 
levels of the outcome of interest  
  
Moderate: The measurement of  the PF 
may be different for different levels of 
the outcome of interest  
  
Low bias: The measurement of the PF is 
unlikely to be different for different 
levels of the outcome of interest  

16 
 
4. Outcome 
Measurement  
a. A clear definition of the outcome is 
provided  
b. Method of outcome measurement 
used is adequately valid and reliable  
c. The method and setting of 
outcome measurement is the same 
for all study participants  
High bias: The measurement of the 
outcome is very likely to be different 
related to the baseline level of the PF  
  
Moderate: The measurement of the 
outcome may be different related to the 
baseline level of the PF  
  
Low bias: The measurement of the 
outcome is unlikely to be different 
related to the baseline level of the PF  
5. Adjustment 
for other 
prognostic 
factors 
a. All other important PFs are 
measured 
b. Clear definitions of the important 
PFs measured are provided  
c. Measurement of all important PFs 
is adequately valid and reliable  
d. The method and setting of PF 
measurement are the same for all 
study participants  
e. Appropriate methods are used to 
deal with missing values of PFs, such 
as multiple imputation   
f. Important PFs are accounted for in 
the study design 
g. Important PFs are accounted for in 
the analysis  
High bias: The observed effect of the PF 
on the outcome is very likely to be 
distorted by another factor related to PF 
and outcome  
  
Moderate: The observed effect of the 
PF on outcome may be distorted by 
another factor related to PF and 
outcome  
  
Low bias: The observed effect of the PF 
on outcome is unlikely to be distorted 
by another factor related to PF and 
outcome  
6. Statistical 
Analysis and 
Reporting  
a. Sufficient presentation of data to 
assess the adequacy of the analytic 
strategy  
b. Strategy for model building is 
appropriate and is based on a 
conceptual framework  or model  
c. The selected statistical model is 
adequate for the design of the study  
d. There is no selective reporting of 
results  
High bias: The reported results are very 
likely to be spurious or biased related to 
analysis or reporting  
  
Moderate: The reported results may be 
spurious or biased related to analysis or 
reporting  
  
Low bias: The reported results are 
unlikely to be spurious or biased related 
to analysis or reporting 
PF = prognostic factor.  
 
 
Step 5: Meta -analysis  
Meta-analysis of prognostic factor studies aim to summarise the (adjusted) prognostic effect of each 
factor of interest. Aside from missing estimates (discussed earlier), challenges for the meta-analyst 
include: (i) having different types of prognostic effect measures (e.g. odds ratio and hazard ratios) 
which are not necessarily comparable;28 (ii) estimates without standard errors, a problem as meta-

17 
 
analysis methods typically weight each study by (a function of) their standard error; (iii) estimates 
relating to different time-points of the outcome occurrence/measurement; (iv) different methods of 
measurement for prognostic factors and outcomes; (v) different sets of adjustment factors; and (vi) 
different approaches to handling continuous prognostic factors (e.g. categorisation, linear, non-
linear trends), including the choice of cut-point value when dichotomising continuous values into 
‘high’ and ‘low’ groups. Many of these issues lead to substantial heterogeneity, such that – if meta-
analysis is performed - summary results then have no direct interpretation.  
Generally, meta-analysis results will be most interpretable, and thus useful, when a separate meta-
analysis is undertaken for groups of ‘similar’ prognostic effect measures. In particular, we suggest to 
consider meta-analysis for: 
 Hazard ratios, odds ratios and risk ratios separately 
 Unadjusted and adjusted associations separately 
 Prognostic factor effects at distinct cut-points (or groups of similar cut-points) separately 
 Prognostic factor effects corresponding to a linear trend (association) separately 
 Prognostic factor effects corresponding to non-linear trends separately 
 Each method of measurement (for factors and outcomes) separately 
 
Furthermore, ideally a meta-analysis of adjusted results should ensure that all included estimates 
are adjusted for the same set of other prognostic factors. This is unlikely, and so a compromise could 
be to ensure that all adjusted estimates in the same meta-analysis have adjusted for at least a (pre-
defined) minimum set of adjustment factors (i.e. established prognostic factors). 
Even when adhering to this guidance, unexplained heterogeneity is likely to remain due to other 
factors (e.g. length of follow-up, treatments received during follow-up). Therefore, if meta-analysis is 
performed, a random effects approach is essential to allow for unexplained heterogeneity across 
studies (Figure 4), as previously described in the BMJ.48 This provides a summary estimate of the 
average prognostic effect of the factor, and the variability in effect across studies. Also potentially 
useful are meta-analysis methods to estimate the trend (e.g. linear effect) of a prognostic factor that 
has been grouped into three or more categories within studies (with each category compared to the 
reference category). These methods generally model the estimated prognostic effect sizes in each 
category as a function of ‘exposure’ level (e.g. mid-point or median prognostic factor value in the 
category), whilst accounting for within-study correlation and between-study heterogeneity.49-53 To 
apply these methods, some additional knowledge of the factor's underlying distribution is usually 
needed to help define the ‘exposure’ level, as the chosen value can impact upon the results.51 

18 
 
Advanced multivariate meta-analysis methods are also available to jointly handle multiple cut-
points,54 multiple methods of measurement,54 or different adjustment factors in prognostic factor 
studies.55 An introduction to multivariate meta-analysis is provided previously in the BMJ.56  
 
  
 Figure 4: Explanation of a random effects meta-analysis of prognostic factor effect estimates 
The true prognostic effect of a factor is likely to vary from study to study, and thus assuming a 
common (fixed) prognostic effect is not sensible. If Yi and var(Yi) denote the prognostic effect 
estimate (e.g. ln(hazard ratio), ln(odds ratio), ln(risk ratio), or mean difference) and its variance in 
study i, then a general random effects meta-analysis model can be specified as:  
  Yi ~ N(𝜇,var(Yi) + 𝜏2),                             
Most researchers use either restricted maximum likelihood or the approach of DerSimonian and 
Laird to estimate this model,57 but other options are available including a Bayesian approach.58 Of 
key interest is the summary (average) estimate, 𝜇^, which reveals the average prognostic effect of 
the factor. The standard deviation of the prognostic effect across studies is denoted by 𝜏, and 
non-zero values suggest there is between-study heterogeneity. Confidence intervals for 𝜇 should 
ideally account for uncertainty in estimated variances (in particular 𝜏),59 and we have found the 
approach of Hartung-Knapp to be robust for this purpose in most settings.60 61  When synthesising 
prognostic effects on the log scale, the summary results and confidence intervals require back-
transformation (using the exponential function) to the original scale.  
 
Application to the CRP review:  
Hemingway et al.14 apply a random effects meta-analysis to combine 53 adjusted prognostic effect 
estimates for CRP from studies that adjusted for at least one of six conventional risk factors (age, 
gender, smoking, diabetes, obesity, and lipids). The summary meta-analysis result was a relative risk 
of 1.97 (95% CI: 1.78 to 2.17), which gives the average prognostic effect of CRP (for those in the top 
versus bottom third of CRP distribution), and suggests larger CRP values are associated with higher 
risk. Although there was substantial between-study heterogeneity, nearly all estimates were in the 
same direction (i.e. relative risk > 1). When restricting meta-analysis to just the 13 studies that 
adjusted for at least all six conventional prognostic factors, the summary relative risk decreased to 
1.65 (95% CI: 1.39 to 1.96) and the between-study heterogeneity reduced. Using the study-specific 
estimates shown Hemingway et al. we updated this meta-analysis (Figure 5), obtaining the same 
summary result but a wider confidence interval (1.34 to 2.04) via the Hartung-Knapp approach.60 
 

19 
 
Figure 5: Forest plot showing the study-specific estimates and meta-analysis summary result of the 
adjusted prognostic effect (relative risk, RR) of CRP taken from the review of Hemingway et al14; all 
studies were adjusted for age, gender, smoking, diabetes, obesity, and lipids, plus up to 14 other 
variables. Meta-analysis results shown are based on a random effects meta-analysis model with 
DerSimonian and Laird estimation of the between-study variances. The summary result is identical 
to Hemingway et al.,14 but the confidence interval is wider as, here, we used the Hartung-Knapp 
approach to account for uncertainty in variance estimates.60 
 
Step 6: Quantifying and examining heterogeneity  
As applies to all meta-analyses, in situations with large heterogeneity across included studies, it may 
be better to refrain from synthesising the study results, and rather display the variability in estimates 
on a forest plot without showing an overall pooled estimate. When meta-analysis is still performed 
in the face of heterogeneity, it is important to quantify and report the magnitude of heterogeneity 
itself, for example via the estimate of 𝜏2 (the between-study variance),62 or an approximate 95% 
prediction interval indicating the potential true prognostic effect of a factor in a new population.48 63   
Subgroup analyses and meta-regression can be used to examine or explore the causes of 
heterogeneity. A subgroup analysis performs a separate meta-analysis for categories defined by a 
particular characteristic, such as those with low risk of bias, those with a follow-up < 1 year or >=1 
year, or those set in countries within Europe. A better approach is meta-regression, which extends 
the meta-analysis equation shown in Figure 4 by including study-level covariates,64 and allows a 
formal comparison of how meta-analysis results differ across groups defined by covariates (e.g. low 


20 
 
risk of bias studies versus other studies at higher risk of bias). Unfortunately, subgroup analyses and 
meta-regression are often problematic. There will often be few studies per subgroup and low power 
to detect genuine causes of heterogeneity. Furthermore, study-level confounding will be rife, such 
that it is difficult to disentangle the associations for one covariate from another. For example, 
studies with a low risk of bias may also have a different length of follow-up, or a particular cut-point 
level, compared with studies at higher risk of bias. 
Application to the CRP review: 
Hemingway et al. report that meta-regression identified four study-level covariates that explained 
some between-study heterogeneity in the prognostic effect of CRP: definition of comparison group, 
number of adjustment variables, the (log) number of events and the proportion of patients with 
stable coronary disease (both reflecting study size).14 Studies originally reporting unequal CRP groups 
had stronger effects than those reporting CRP on a continuous scale. For each additional adjustment 
factor the summary relative risk decreased by 3%. The summary relative risk was smaller among 
studies with more than the median number of outcome events, and smaller among studies confined 
to stable coronary disease. There was no evidence that the CRP effect differed according to the 
number of quality items reported by a study. 
 
Step 7: Examining small -study effects  
The term ‘small-study effects’ refers to when there is a systematic difference in prognostic effect 
estimates for small studies and large studies.65 A particular concern is when small studies (especially 
those that are exploratory, as these often evaluate many potential prognostic factors with relative 
few outcome events) show larger prognostic effects than larger studies. This may be due to chance 
or heterogeneity, but a major threat is publication bias and selective reporting, which are endemic in 
prognosis research.26 62 Such reporting biases lead to those smaller studies with (statistically) 
significant or larger prognostic factor effect estimates more likely to be published or reported in 
sufficient detail, and thus included in meta-analysis, than those smaller studies with non-significant 
or smaller prognostic effect estimates. This is a potential concern for both unadjusted and adjusted 
prognostic effects. A primary study usually estimates an unadjusted prognostic effect for each of 
multiple prognostic factors, but then study authors may only report those that are statistically 
significant. Adjusted results are also often only reported for those prognostic factors that retain 
statistical significance in both univariable and multivariable analysis. A consequence is that meta-

21 
 
analysis results will be biased, with larger summary prognostic effects than in truth, and potentially 
some factors being deemed to have clinical value when they actually do not.  
The evidence for small-study effects is usually considered on a funnel plot, which shows the study 
estimates (x-axis) against their precision (y-axis). This is usually recommended if there are 10 or 
more studies.65 This should ideally show a symmetric, funnel like shape, with results from larger 
studies at the centre of the funnel, with smaller studies spanning out in both directions equally. 
Asymmetry will arise if there are small-study effects, with a greater proportion of smaller studies in 
one particular direction. Statistical tests for asymmetry in risk, odds and hazard ratios can be used, 
such as Peter’s and Debray’s test.66 67 Contour-enhanced funnel plots also show the statistical 
significance of individual studies, and ‘missing’ studies are perhaps more likely to fall within regions 
of non-significance if publication bias was the cause of small-study effects.  
However, as small-study effects may also arise due to heterogeneity, it is difficult to disentangle 
publication bias from heterogeneity in a single review. For example, if smaller studies used an 
analysis with fewer adjustment factors, then this may cause larger prognostic factor effects in such 
studies rather than due to publication bias. Multivariate meta-analysis might be able to reduce the 
impact of small study effects, by ‘borrowing strength’ from related information.56  
As previously mentioned, a related concern is that smaller prognostic factor studies are generally at 
higher risk of bias than larger studies. Smaller studies tend to be more exploratory in nature and 
typically based on a convenient sample, often examining many (sometimes hundreds) of potential 
prognostic factors, with relatively few outcome events. This leads to spurious (due to chance) and 
potentially biased (due to poor estimation properties68) prognostic effect estimates. In contrast, 
larger studies are often confirmatory studies focusing on one or a few prognostic factors, and are 
more likely to adopt a protocol-driven and prospective approach, with clearer reporting regardless 
of their findings.3 As such, larger studies are less likely to identify spurious prognostic factor effect 
estimates. Therefore, it is helpful to examine small study effects (potential publication bias) when 
restricting analysis to the subset of studies at low of risk of bias. If this resolves previous issues of 
small study effects in the full meta-analysis, then it gives even more credence to focus conclusions 
and recommendations on the meta-analysis results based on just the higher quality studies. 
Application to the CRP review: 
Figure 6 shows a funnel plot of the study estimates within the CRP meta-analysis shown in Figure 5. 
There is clear asymmetry, raising a strong concern of publication bias. There was an insufficient 

22 
 
number of studies considered at low risk of bias to evaluate small-study effects in a subset of higher 
quality studies. 
 
Figure 6: Evidence of funnel plot asymmetry (small-study effects) in the CRP meta-analysis shown in 
Figure 5. The smaller studies (those with higher standard errors) have relative risk (RR) estimates 
mainly to the right of the larger studies, and thus give the largest prognostic effect estimates. A 
concern is that this is due to publication bias, with ‘missing’ studies potentially falling in the white 
area denoting non-significant RR estimates.  
 
 
Step 8: Reporting and interpretation of results  
As with all research studies, clear and complete reporting is essential for reviews of prognostic factor 
studies. Most of the reporting guidelines of PRISMA and MOOSE will be relevant,69 70 and should be 
complemented by REMARK,46 47 which was aimed at primary prognostic factor studies. More specific 
guidance for reporting systematic reviews of prognostic factor studies is under development. 
Interpretation and translation of summary meta-analysis results is an important final step. The 
guidance in the previous steps are the essential input for this. Discussion is necessary regarding if 


23 
 
and how the prognostic factors identified may be useful in practice (i.e. translation of results to 
clinical practice), and what further research is necessary. Ideally impact studies (e.g. randomised 
trials which compare groups which do and do not utilise a prognostic factor to inform clinical 
practice) are needed before strong recommendations for clinical practice are made; however, these 
are rare and outside the score of the review framework outlined in this article. 
Further, for interpreting the certainty (confidence) of the results of a review of intervention 
effectiveness, Grades of Recommendation, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) was 
developed. This approach assesses the overall quality and certainty of evidence for the summary 
estimates of the intervention effects by addressing five domains: risk of bias, inconsistency, 
imprecision, indirectness and publication bias. The GRADE domains are judged using the information 
obtained by the tools and methods addressed in the above steps. Whether these domains, 
developed for reviews of interventions, are equally applicable to judge the certainty of summary 
results of systematic reviews of prognostic factor studies is yet unknown. Compared to reviews of 
intervention studies, allowing for heterogeneity (the inconsistency domain) might be more 
acceptable in reviews of prognostic factor studies due to the inevitable heterogeneity caused by 
study differences in methods of measurement, adjustment factors and statistical analysis methods, 
amongst others. Further, the threat of selective reporting or publication bias in reviews of prognostic 
factor studies may be more severe than in reviews of intervention studies, due to the 
aforementioned problems of exploratory studies, poor reporting, and biased analysis methods. 
There is yet limited empirical evidence for the use of the existing domains for grading the certainty 
of summary estimates of prognostic  factor studies, although a first attempt has been made,71 and 
one for grading the certainty of evidence of summary estimates of overall prognosis  studies.72 We 
note that reviewers need to be especially cautious when comparing the adjusted prognostic value of 
different index factors, for example, to conclude whether the summary adjusted hazard ratio of 
prognostic factor A is larger than that for factor B. Usually different sets of studies will be available 
for each index factor, and so the comparison will be indirect and potentially biased. Moreover, the 
studies evaluating factor A may often have used different sets of adjustment factors (other 
prognostic factors) than those evaluating factor B. It will be rare to find studies on different index 
factors that used exactly the same set of adjustment factors. We therefore recommend reviewers 
restrict comparisons (of the adjusted prognostic value) of two or more index factors to those studies 
that at least used a similar, minimally required set of adjustment factors.73  
Application to CRP review:   

24 
 
The meta-analysis results suggest CRP is a prognostic factor for the risk of death and nonfatal 
cardiovascular events, even when only including the largest studies that adjusted for all six 
conventional prognostic factors. In their discussion, Hemingway et al. downgrade the meta-analysis 
findings, due to a strong concern about the quality and reliability of the underlying evidence.14 The 
absence of pre-specified protocols, poor and potentially biased reported, and strong potential for 
publication bias prevented them from making firm conclusions about whether CRP has prognostic 
factor after adjustment for established prognostic factors. They state that the concerns “explicitly 
challenge the statement for healthcare professionals made by the Centers for Disease Control that 
measuring CRP is both ‘useful’ and ‘independent’ as a marker of prognosis”.74 
Summary  
We described the key steps and methods for conducting a systematic review and meta-analysis of 
prognostic factor studies. Current reviews are often limited by the quality and heterogeneity of 
primary studies.75 We expect the prevalence of such reviews to grow rapidly, especially with 
Cochrane (via the Cochrane Prognosis Methods Group: www.methods.cochrane.org/prognosis/) 
currently embarking upon them. Our guidance will therefore help reviewers to write grant 
applications for reviews of prognostic factor studies, and to develop protocols of the review.76 Such 
protocols should be published, ideally at the same time as the review is registered, for example 
within PROSPERO, the international prospective register of systematic reviews 
(www.crd.york.ac.uk/PROSPERO/), or the Cochrane database. Lastly, we note that some of the 
limitations described (e.g. use of different cut-point values across studies) could be alleviated if the 
individual participant data (IPD) were obtained from primary studies,77 rather than being reliant on 
results extracted from study publications. Nevertheless, it cannot resolve all problems (e.g. quality of 
original study, availability of different adjustment factors), and it may take a number of years to 
obtain IPD from relevant studies.78 Further discussion on IPD meta-analysis of prognostic factor 
studies is given elsewhere.79 
 
 
 
 
 

25 
 
Competing interests: None 
 
Exclusive licence: The Corresponding Author has the right to grant on behalf of all authors and does 
grant on behalf of all authors, a worldwide licence to the Publishers and its licensees in perpetuity, in 
all forms, formats and media (whether known now or created in the future), to i) publish, reproduce, 
distribute, display and store the Contribution, ii) translate the Contribution into other languages, 
create adaptations, reprints, include within collections and create summaries, extracts and/or, 
abstracts of the Contribution, iii) create any other derivative work(s) based on the Contribution, iv) to 
exploit all subsidiary rights in the Contribution, v) the inclusion of electronic links from the 
Contribution to third party material where-ever it may be located; and, vi) licence any third party to 
do any or all of the above. 
 
Funding: Richard Riley and Kym Snell are supported by funding from the Evidence Synthesis Working 
Group, which is funded by the National Institute for Health Research School for Primary Care 
Research (NIHR SPCR) [ProjectNumber 390]. Kym Snell is also supported by a launching fellowship 
from the NIHR SPCR. Thomas Debray was supported by funding from the Netherlands Organisation 
for Health Research and Development (91617050 and 91215058). The views expressed are those of 
the author(s) and not necessarily those of the NIHR, the NHS, the Department of Health or the 
Netherlands Organisation for Health Research and Development. GSC was supported by the NIHR 
Biomedical Research Centre, Oxford 
 
Contribution statement: RR and KM conceived the article content and structure. RR and KM wrote 
the first draft, and RR, KS, JE and TS added application to the CRP review. All authors provided 
intellectual content, text, and corrections to improve the first draft.  KM, DA and GC co-developed 
the CHARMS guidance that informed the content of this paper. JH co-developed the QUIPS checklist, 
and informed the use and interpretation of QUIPS for this paper. RR, KM, and JH and subsequently 
all other authors revised the article after comments received by reviewers and the BMJ. RR is the 
guarantor.  
Acknowledgements: We thank the BMJ Editors and three reviewers for their helpful feedback that 
improved the article upon revision. 

26 
 
Reference List 
 
1. Leeflang MMG, Deeks JJ, Gatsonis C, et al. Systematic Reviews of Diagnostic Test Accuracy Ann 
Intern Med 2008;149:889-97. 
2. Hemingway H, Croft P, Perel P, et al. Prognosis research strategy (PROGRESS) 1: a framework for 
researching clinical outcomes. BMJ 2013;346:e5595. 
3. Riley RD, Hayden JA, Steyerberg EW, et al. Prognosis Research Strategy (PROGRESS) 2: prognostic 
factor research. PLoS Med 2013;10(2):e1001380. 
4. Steyerberg EW, Moons KG, van der Windt DA, et al. Prognosis Research Strategy (PROGRESS) 3: 
prognostic model research. PLoS Med 2013;10(2):e1001381. 
5. Hingorani AD, Windt DA, Riley RD, et al. Prognosis research strategy (PROGRESS) 4: stratified 
medicine research. BMJ 2013;346:e5793. 
6. Debray TP, Damen JA, Snell KI, et al. A guide to systematic review and meta-analysis of prediction 
model performance. BMJ 2017;356:i6460. 
7. Debray TPA, Damen JAAG, Riley RD, et al. A framework for meta-analysis of prediction model 
studies with binary and time-to-event outcomes. Stat Methods Med Res 2018 (in-press). 
8. Bouwmeester W, Zuithoff NP, Mallett S, et al. Reporting and methods in clinical prediction 
research: a systematic review. PLoS Med 2012;9(5):1-12. 
9. Moons KG, Altman DG, Reitsma JB, et al. Transparent Reporting of a multivariable prediction 
model for Individual Prognosis Or Diagnosis (TRIPOD): explanation and elaboration. Ann 
Intern Med 2015;162(1):W1-73. 
10. Altman DG. Systematic reviews of evaluations of prognostic variables. BMJ 2001;323(7306):224-
8. 
11. Altman DG, Riley RD. An evidence-based approach to prognostic markers. Nature Clinical Practice 
Oncology 2005;2:466-72. 
12. Riley RD, Sauerbrei W, Altman DG. Prognostic markers in cancer: the evolution of evidence from 
single studies to meta-analysis, and beyond. Br J Cancer 2009;100(8):1219-29. 
13. Riley RD, Burchill SA, Abrams KR, et al. A systematic review and evaluation of the use of tumour 
markers in paediatric oncology: Ewing's sarcoma and neuroblastoma. Health Technol Assess 
2003;7(5):1-162. 
14. Hemingway H, Philipson P, Chen R, et al. Evaluating the quality of research into a single 
prognostic biomarker: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 83 studies of C-Reactive 
protein in stable coronary artery disease. PLoS Med 2010;7(6):e1000286. 
15. Moons KG, de Groot JA, Bouwmeester W, et al. Critical appraisal and data extraction for 
systematic reviews of prediction modelling studies: the CHARMS checklist. PLoS Med 
2014;11(10):e1001744. 
16. Royston P. Explained variation for survival models. Stata Journal 2006;6:83-96. 
17. Royston P, Sauerbrei W. A new measure of prognostic separation in survival data. Stat Med 
2004;23(5):723-48. 
18. Vickers AJ, Van Calster B, Steyerberg EW. Net benefit approaches to the evaluation of prediction 
models, molecular markers, and diagnostic tests. BMJ 2016;352:i6. 

27 
 
19. Pencina MJ, D'Agostino RB, Sr., D'Agostino RB, Jr., et al. Evaluating the added predictive ability of 
a new marker: from area under the ROC curve to reclassification and beyond. Stat Med 
2008;27(2):157-72. 
20. Pennells L, Kaptoge S, White IR, et al. Assessing risk prediction models using individual 
participant data from multiple studies. Am J Epidemiol 2014;179(5):621-32. 
21. Wynants L, Riley RD, Timmerman D, et al. Random-effects meta-analysis of the clinical utility of 
tests and prediction models. Stat Med 2018;37(12):2034-52. 
22. Ingui BJ, Rogers MA. Searching for clinical prediction rules in MEDLINE. J Am Med Inform Assoc 
2001;8(4):391-7. 
23. Geersing GJ, Bouwmeester W, Zuithoff P, et al. Search filters for finding prognostic and 
diagnostic prediction studies in Medline to enhance systematic reviews. PLoS One 
2012;7(2):e32844. 
24. Haynes RB, McKibbon KA, Wilczynski NL, et al. Optimal search strategies for retrieving 
scientifically strong studies of treatment from Medline: analytical survey. BMJ 
2005;330(7501):1179. 
25. Wong SS, Wilczynski NL, Haynes RB, et al. Developing optimal search strategies for detecting 
sound clinical prediction studies in MEDLINE. AMIA Annu Symp Proc 2003:728-32. 
26. Parmar MK, Torri V, Stewart L. Extracting summary statistics to perform meta-analyses of the 
published literature for survival endpoints. Stat Med 1998;17(24):2815-34. 
27. Tierney JF, Stewart LA, Ghersi D, et al. Practical methods for incorporating summary time-to-
event data into meta-analysis. Trials 2007;8:16. 
28. Perneger TV. Estimating the relative hazard by the ratio of logarithms of event-free proportions. 
Contemporary Clinical Trials 2008;29:762–66. 
29. Perez T, McLellan J, Perera R. Extraction of unadjusted estimates of prognostic association for 
meta-analysis: simulation methods as good alternatives to trend and direct method 
estimation. J Clin Epidemiol 2018;99:153-63. 
30. Riley RD, Abrams KR, Sutton AJ, et al. Reporting of prognostic markers: current problems and 
development of guidelines for evidence-based practice in the future. Br J Cancer 
2003;88(8):1191-8. 
31. Borenstein M, Hedges LV, Higgins JPT, et al. Converting Among Effect Sizes. In: Borenstein M, 
Hedges LV, Higgins JPT, et al., eds. Introduction to Meta‐Analysis. West Sussex, UK.: John 
Wiley & Sons 2009. 
32. Sadashima E, Hattori S, Takahashi K. Meta-analysis of prognostic studies for a biomarker with a 
study-specific cutoff value. Research Synthesis Methods 2016;7(4):402-19. 
33. Nieminen P, Lehtiniemi H, Vähäkangas K, et al. Standardised regression coefficient as an effect 
size index in summarising the reported findings between quantitative exposure and 
response variables in epidemiological studies. Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Public Health 
2013 10:e 8 8 5 4. 
34. Kyzas PA, Denaxa-Kyza D, Ioannidis JP. Almost all articles on cancer prognostic markers report 
statistically significant results. European journal of cancer 2007;43(17):2559-79. 
35. Kyzas PA, Denaxa-Kyza D, Ioannidis JP. Quality of reporting of cancer prognostic marker studies: 
association with reported prognostic effect. J Natl Cancer Inst 2007;99(3):236-43. 
36. Kyzas PA, Loizou KT, Ioannidis JP. Selective reporting biases in cancer prognostic factor studies. J 
Natl Cancer Inst 2005;97(14):1043-55. 

28 
 
37. Mallett S, Royston P, Dutton S, et al. Reporting methods in studies developing prognostic models 
in cancer: a review. BMC medicine 2010;8:20. 
38. Collins GS, Mallett S, Omar O, et al. Developing risk prediction models for type 2 diabetes: a 
systematic review of methodology and reporting. BMC medicine 2011;9:103. 
39. Collins GS, Omar O, Shanyinde M, et al. A systematic review finds prediction models for chronic 
kidney disease were poorly reported and often developed using inappropriate methods. J 
Clin Epidemiol 2013;66(3):268-77. 
40. Burton A, Altman DG. Missing covariate data within cancer prognostic studies: a review of 
current reporting and proposed guidelines. Br J Cancer 2004;91(1):4-8. 
41. Collins GS, de Groot JA, Dutton S, et al. External validation of multivariable prediction models: a 
systematic review of methodological conduct and reporting. BMC Med Res Methodol 
2014;14:40. 
42. Mallett S, Royston P, Waters R, et al. Reporting performance of prognostic models in cancer: a 
review. BMC medicine 2010;8:21. 
43. Hayden JA, van der Windt DA, Cartwright JL, et al. Assessing bias in studies of prognostic factors. 
Ann Intern Med 2013;158(4):280-6. 
44. Sterne JA, Hernan MA, Reeves BC, et al. ROBINS-I: a tool for assessing risk of bias in non-
randomised studies of interventions. BMJ 2016;355:i4919. 
45. Wells GA, Shea B, O'Connell D, et al. The Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS) for assessing the quality 
of nonrandomized studies in meta-analyses. 2009 
[http://www.ohri.ca/programs/clinical_epidemiology/oxford.htm]. 
46. Altman DG, McShane LM, Sauerbrei W, et al. Reporting Recommendations for Tumor Marker 
Prognostic Studies (REMARK): explanation and elaboration. PLoS Med 2012;9(5):e1001216. 
47. McShane LM, Altman DG, Sauerbrei W, et al. REporting recommendations for tumour MARKer 
prognostic studies (REMARK). Br J Cancer 2005;93(4):387-91. 
48. Riley RD, Higgins JP, Deeks JJ. Interpretation of random effects meta-analyses. BMJ 
2011;342:d549. 
49. Berlin JA, Longnecker MP, Greenland S. Meta-analysis of epidemiologic dose-response data. 
Epidemiology 1993;4(3):218-28. 
50. Greenland S, Longnecker MP. Methods for trend estimation from summarized dose-response 
data, with applications to meta-analysis. Am J Epidemiol 1992;135(11):1301-9. 
51. Hartemink N, Boshuizen HC, Nagelkerke NJ, et al. Combining risk estimates from observational 
studies with different exposure cutpoints: a meta-analysis on body mass index and diabetes 
type 2. Am J Epidemiol 2006;163(11):1042-52. 
52. Shi JQ, Copas JB. Meta-analysis for trend estimation. Stat Med 2004;23(1):3-19; discussion 159-
62. 
53. Orsini N, Li R, Wolk A, et al. Meta-analysis for linear and nonlinear dose-response relations: 
examples, an evaluation of approximations, and software. Am J Epidemiol 2012;175(1):66-
73. 
54. Riley RD, Elia EG, Malin G, et al. Multivariate meta-analysis of prognostic factor studies with 
multiple cut-points and/or methods of measurement. Stat Med 2015;34(17):2481-96. 
55. Collaboration FS. Systematically missing confounders in individual participant data meta-analysis 
of observational cohort studies. Stat Med 2009;28(8):1218-37. 

29 
 
56. Riley RD, Jackson D, Salanti G, et al. Multivariate and network meta-analysis of multiple 
outcomes and multiple treatments: rationale, concepts, and examples. BMJ 2017;358:j3932. 
57. DerSimonian R, Laird N. Meta-analysis in clinical trials. Control Clin Trials 1986;7. 
58. Langan D, Higgins JP, Simmonds M. An empirical comparison of heterogeneity variance 
estimators in 12 894 meta-analyses. Res Synth Methods 2015;6(2):195-205. 
59. Cornell JE, Mulrow CD, Localio R, et al. Random-effects meta-analysis of inconsistent effects: a 
time for change. Ann Intern Med 2014;160(4):267-70. 
60. Hartung J, Knapp G. A refined method for the meta-analysis of controlled clinical trials with 
binary outcome. Stat Med 2001;20(24):3875-89. 
61. Partlett C, Riley RD. Random effects meta-analysis: Coverage performance of 95% confidence 
and prediction intervals following REML estimation. Stat Med 2016. 
62. Rucker G, Schwarzer G, Carpenter JR, et al. Undue reliance on I(2) in assessing heterogeneity may 
mislead. BMC Med Res Methodol 2008;8:79. 
63. Higgins JP, Thompson SG, Spiegelhalter DJ. A re-evaluation of random-effects meta-analysis. 
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A 2009;172:137-59. 
64. Berkey CS, Hoaglin DC, Mosteller F, et al. A random-effects regression model for meta-analysis. 
Stat Med 1995;14(4):395-411. 
65. Sterne JAC, Sutton AJ, Ioannidis JPA, et al. Recommendations for examining and interpreting 
funnel plot asymmetry in meta-analyses of randomised controlled trials. BMJ 
2011;342:d4002. 
66. Debray TPA, Moons KGM, Riley RD. Detecting small-study effects and funnel plot asymmetry in 
meta-analysis of survival data: A comparison of new and existing tests. Res Synth Methods 
2018;9(1):41-50. 
67. Peters JL, Sutton AJ, Jones DR, et al. Comparison of two methods to detect publication bias in 
meta-analysis. Jama 2006;295(6):676-80. 
68. Firth D. Bias reduction of maximum likelihood estimates. Biometrika 1993;80(1):27-38. 
69. Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, et al. Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-
analyses: the PRISMA statement. BMJ 2009;339:b2535. 
70. Stroup DF, Berlin JA, Morton SC, et al. Meta-analysis of observational studies in epidemiology: a 
proposal for reporting. Meta-analysis Of Observational Studies in Epidemiology (MOOSE) 
group. Jama 2000;283(15):2008-12. 
71. Huguet A, Hayden JA, Stinson J, et al. Judging the quality of evidence in reviews of prognostic 
factor research: adapting the GRADE framework. Systematic reviews 2013;2:71. 
72. Iorio A, Spencer FA, Falavigna M, et al. Use of GRADE for assessment of evidence about 
prognosis: rating confidence in estimates of event rates in broad categories of patients. BMJ 
2015;350:h870. 
73. Takwoingi Y, Leeflang MM, Deeks JJ. Empirical evidence of the importance of comparative 
studies of diagnostic test accuracy. Ann Intern Med 2013;158(7):544-54. 
74. Pearson TA, Mensah GA, Alexander RW, et al. Markers of inflammation and cardiovascular 
disease: application to clinical and public health practice: A statement for healthcare 
professionals from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the American Heart 
Association. Circulation 2003;107(3):499-511. 

30 
 
75. Sauerbrei W, Holländer N, Riley RD, et al. Evidence-based assessment and application of 
prognostic markers: the long way from single studies to meta-analysis. Communications in 
Statistics 2006;35:1333-42. 
76. Peat G, Riley RD, Croft P, et al. Improving the transparency of prognosis research: the role of 
reporting, data sharing, registration, and protocols. PLoS Med 2014;11(7):e1001671. 
77. Riley RD, Lambert PC, Abo-Zaid G. Meta-analysis of individual participant data: rationale, 
conduct, and reporting. BMJ 2010;340:c221. 
78. Altman DG, Trivella M, Pezzella F, et al. Systematic review of multiple studies of prognosis: the 
feasibility of obtaining individual patient data. In: Auget J-L, Balakrishnan N, Mesbah M, et 
al., eds. Advances in statistical methods for the health sciences Boston: Birkhäuser 2006:3-
18. 
79. Abo-Zaid G, Sauerbrei W, Riley RD. Individual participant data meta-analysis of prognostic factor 
studies: state of the art? BMC Med Res Methodol 2012;12:56. 
 